# Recovering surface mass balance from kinematic observations

## reassurance

The point of the project is not to reach a particular destination!  It is to _help you learn fast from wherever you currently are_.  So please be honest with yourself about what you don't know, and please do ask about it!  Another student may know more programming than you, or have seen more differential equations, or have more glaciers background, or data-manipulation skills, or whatever.  That is irrelevant to my goal.  I just want to help you move forward as far as possible in one intense week.  Forward progress must be from things _you_ do understand into things _you_ do not yet understand!

## description

PROJECT 10: Recovering surface mass balance from kinematic observations

ADVISOR: Ed Bueler

DESCRIPTION: Remote observations of glaciers using visible and radar imaging allow increasingly-routine determination of ice surface elevation and ice surface velocity.  On the other hand, surface mass balance (SMB) rates can be hard to observe remotely, for instance in ablation areas and/or firn areas with ice lenses.  The surface kinematical equation (SKE) is worth understanding in this regard, in addition to its application to modeling glacier evolution.  We will use the SKE to invert time-dependent synthetic observations to extract SMB, a feat attempted before (e.g. Gudmundsson & Bauder, 1999).  A newly-discovered form of the SKE makes the topic worth a second look.  Simplified 1D geometry and the linear nature of the problem make it achievable in a week-long project.

SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS: Matlab or Octave or Python/numpy, _running locally on your machine_.

REQUIRED STUDENT BACKGROUND: Exposure to differential equations and linear algebra.

## references and reading

This reference paper is available in the current directory:

  * Gudmundsson, G. H., & Bauder, A. (1999). _Towards an indirect determination of the mass‐balance distribution of glaciers using the kinematic boundary condition._ Geografiska Annaler: Series A, Physical Geography, 81(4), 575-583.

FIXME:  I will also put in a draft of a paper I am writing, _A new kinematical conservation law for glaciers_.

## getting started

The Python script `glacier.py` computes all the relevant surface fields of a synthetic, time-varying glacier.  The PDF `synglac.pdf`, generated by the LaTeX files in the `doc/` directory, shows the formulas used in this case.

My suggestion for Project 10 is that you use `glacier.py` to generate an initial test of the inversion of the kinematic conservation law (KCL), a new form of the surface kinematical equation (SKE).  The following paragraphs are documentation to help you do that.

### overdetermined systems, least squares, and using the SVD

FIXME

### discretizing space-time to generate a linear system

FIXME
